salaam adab and welcome to what promises
to be an
epic conversation between doctors
adaraza and siddhartha mukherjee
on dr azra za's groundbreaking book the
first cell
and the human costs of pursuing cancer
to the last
organized by habib university i am vaca
frisby
president of habib university few months
ago
we had the privilege of hosting one of
the world's leading intellectuals
professor noam chomsky i at that time
thought
that it would be at least a year or so
before we will have such luck
in attracting someone of similar stature
and impact
as it turned out i was exactly 200
percent wrong
it has only taken us three months to
have not one
but two remarkable thinkers
practitioners
artists scientists all combined
we are privileged to be in the company
of these
azim athan two great ones
the formal introduction of one of these
two greats of the author
will be made by our distinguished
discussant dr siddhartha mukherjee
and it is my pleasure and honor to
introduce dr siddhartha mukherjee
or sid as he is fondly called by many
i however must confess to some
ambivalent feelings
in making this introduction you see
prior to googling sid's name
as a child of south asian parents
i was reasonably content with my life
compared to your regular shabbi sahib or
sharma science children
i had made my parents proud and happy
but i have to tell you for the first
time i am somewhat relieved that my
parents are no longer alive
to see what mukherjee saab's boy has
accomplished
stanford check harvard
check oxford check
authoring pulitzer prize-winning new
york times bestsellers
check paradigm changing research and
insight about the world's most
devastating disease
check oh my god dude
you got chill you are making it
impossible
for any average ivy league shmo they see
to follow you
what's more remarkable that everything
that i just listed
are diluted under statements about the
impact and genius of siddhartha
mukherjee
his voice is not of merely a world
leading expert about cancer
his scientific brilliance coupled with
his literary virtuosity
make him a cultural phenomenon and an
icon
great argument for liberal arts
education by the way
siddhartha mukherjee is an associate
professor in the department of medicine
at columbia university in new york
where his groundbreaking studies into
the composition and behavior of cancer
cells
have pushed the boundaries of modern
medicine dr mukherjee's innovation
innovative research signals a paradigm
shift in cancer pathology
and has enabled the development of
treatments
that reach beyond current pharmaceutical
models
towards new biological and cellular
therapies
dr mukherjee generates hope for
countless patients and families around
the world while revolutionizing our
blueprint for healing
siddhartha mukherjee is the author of
the emperor of all
maladies a biography of cancer which
earned him the 2011 pulitzer prize
and the gene an intimate history which
won international awards and was
recognized by the washington post
and the new york times as one of the
most influential books of 2016.
sid along with azra are our fearless and
noble warriors
taking on this mighty emperor of all
melodies
what's especially poignant is to see
that these two great south asians from
up
islamabad delhi regardless of the
refugees of the last eight decades
share this urgent common purpose and
born in this fight
and in the best traditions of us with
such grace
and such beauty it's my great honor to
now invite our discussion for today
dr siddharth thank you so much
that was a really lovely lovely
introduction
it's now my privilege to introduce azra
and her book and talk a little bit about
her book
this is a very large task because um
azura is a little bit like a
kaleidoscope
if you turn her left you see a new
vision if you turn her right to see a
new vision
you know and you don't know whether it's
mirrors or whether it's the pieces of
glass but
every time you turn the kaleidoscope it
becomes a new vision
which brings me to optics because
[Music]
of course it was 19th and 18th and 17th
century optics
which not only invented the kaleidoscope
but also invented the microscope
and the telescope and there is something
in azra which has
both a microscopic and a telescopic
quality i want to talk about those two
things
the microscopic quality is
to go into her own life to go into the
life of a patient
to understand the minutia
why this cell is
ruffled while this adjacent cell is not
why this bone marrow looks this way and
why these blood counts are that way
the telescopic quality
is to take huge step backs
from the microscope and ask questions
about where
we're going why we're going there
what happens and what happens in the
future
so uh um azra is three scopes
combined in one a kaleidoscope a
microscope and a telescope
do we have a technical
issue with sense feed
all right i'll get in touch with him and
uh or we can
uh simply continue i can take over
yeah while we wait for him to get back
online
[Music]
okay said you're back but you're muted
yeah yeah
um i'm on a very powerful connection so
i don't know what that uh
what why that is but anyway maybe
because of the
long distance so i want to talk a little
bit about the book
um it is a memoir on one hand it is also
a memoir of her own husband's passing
and her response to it it is
a history um of her
exploration into where we are in cancer
research
but also it's a manifesto and and it's a
manifesto of the future
or where we should be going as we move
forward into
a new future so it's three books in one
and yet it reads as if it's one whole
book
and much like asrashi has a multiple
instruments but reads like one human
being
um and also and i've worked
together scientifically medically
professionally but also i would say
artistically for more than a decade
um but let's begin with the book
because then we'll start the journey
somewhere
um so azure tell us what what's the main
message of the book
and tell me about sort of what prompted
you to write it
thank you vasipan sid the primary
message of the book
is not rocket science
basically in a nutshell i'm
advocating for the earliest
earliest possible detection and
elimination of cancer
now i emphasize two well-known
facts about cancer to do so
these are beyond dispute the first is
that ninety percent of cancers that are
found at stage one
are cured but ninety percent of those
found at stage four we are still
struggling with to find a solution for
them
so in other words the earlier we find
cancer the better this is
undisputable well the question is how
early
why should we be satisfied with finding
stage 1 or stage 2
because those still require brutal
treatments
which brings me to the second
indisputable fact about cancer which is
that it starts in a single
cell so my challenge is
why are we setting our goals so low that
okay let's find stage one
and then treat patient as if we are
hitting a dog with a baseball bat to get
rid of
its fleas no we need a more
compassionate
and a more universally applicable
solution
and that would be prevention by
targeting the first set
also sid as you said so beautifully just
now
there's something so compelling about
you whenever you speak
i've forgotten what i was supposed to
say in the introduction thanks to you
but actually the second message of the
book is within the subtitle
which is the human costs of
pursuing cancer to the last so not only
is my call to find the first cell and
target it and eliminate it but also
to stop obsessing so much about trying
to cure cancer that we are forgetting
the
physical the emotional the spiritual the
financial
anguish that we are causing to the
patient to the families to our society
i think what i am saying is we need a
holistic approach
and by holistic for god's sake i don't
mean we should be sitting under a bunion
tree
and eating pumpkin seed and chanting
hymns by holistic i
mean think about the whole patient
not just about the cancer and the last
thing i'd like to say about the book is
that
in fact the book has many authors
it's not just me there are testimonials
from
patients who are alive now who have been
negotiating their way
through this tortuous journey of having
a chronic disease requiring
weekly blood or platelet transfusions
for years
these are very serious tools on people
yet their nobility of endurance
their courage which is what we
take as helium for our spirits comes
through
in addition there are for example
chapter six about andrew is basically
written by my daughter shahzad
and andrew's 25 year old sister cat
but i would say that my favorite part of
the book would be the last section which
is written by
families of individuals we have lost
years after we lost the patients i go
back
to families and i ask them to cast a
backward
glance and now that they have the luxury
of time
to let things settle where everything is
not
immediately hyper reactive to
tell us what decisions would they have
changed
what choices would be
altered by this period of now
registering and processing all the
information
and frankly the impetus to write the
book now sid has been
both scientific and
a human angle to it because we are
failing at both spectacularly
and this is what brings me to ask you
because
as you very well know and i proclaim it
from the rooftops that
you are the single best science writer
that history has seen
and that is pitting you against some
real grapes
but i think the emperor of all maladies
your book
has really shifted the paradigm
seriously and
it is there is a very good reason for
why
it is included in the curriculum of the
best universities already
so i'd like you i'd like to ask you
before we end the subject of
my book to tell us how you use the story
of
the persian queen atos in your book and
what is that strategy and what
the point i have tried to make in the
book you made with this just one
story go ahead well i mean i think
that um when i was writing the emperor
like you know it ended up being a 600
page book
and when you write a 600 page book you
need
at places to stop
and evaluate where you've been where
you're
now and where you're going i mean the
book
the improv maladies was inspired by a
patient
asking me the question in the middle of
her chemotherapy
where where was i where am i now where
am i going
what does my journey look like
and i'm very fond of this idea of
journey because
it implies a kind of process that you
take
and you know there's a whole history of
books
uh great books that have to do with
nothing to do with cancer but have to do
with journeys
but cancer is a journey as you know very
well from your own family
and so i took in the middle of the book
i often took these
kinds of things that i would do things
that no one would
would do otherwise i might write
a chapter which was one paragraph long
because the weight of that paragraph
which may be a conversation with a
patient the weight of that paragraph
is enough to sustain an entire chapter
you don't have to write more
after you've had that conversation and
writing more actually diminishes the
conversation
on the other hand i might take a kind of
thought experiment the idea you know
borrowed from the
from the physicists of the 19th century
and say
let's perform a thought experiment and
the thought experiment is let's
pull let's pull someone from history and
migrate her through time
and in this case it will mean
with breast cancer and and and here i
ask the question
what would she look like today what
would she feel like today
and what would she feel like 10 years
from now or 20 years from what could we
do to her
and of course at the end we come to the
idea that you know
the the early detection of her cancer
and appropriate therapy for that early
detection for cancer
would be her future that is very clearly
what you demarcated in your book is the
future of
where we're going i like in particular
as uh this idea that you said in
in with patience of looking back
and and understanding the future right
looking back and understanding
what decisions could they have made what
decisions could be made etc
now that idea of course comes not only
from medicine but of course it comes
from the humanities it's a
the idea of uh you know in
in medicine it comes in many forms it
comes in the form of the word of autopsy
right but that word is a very beautiful
word
many people might not know that autopsy
that word comes from
to see for oneself autopsy
right to learn or to see for oneself
and when you as a doctor
go back to a patient and or go back to
patients family
you're also performing a kind of autopsy
a psychiatric autopsy a medical autopsy
because you're seeing for yourself what
would have happened or what could have
happened
and i think in some ways your book is
also
aside from as i said many books it's
also an autopsy
and that autopsy has to do with going
back
in time and finding the first
cell um so tell us a little bit about
what the first cell is and why it's
important
and why it it is the title of your book
well i think
exactly what i said cancer begins in a
single cell
but our problem is that it's a silent
killer so
by the time you have even a 0.1
millimeter
of tumor it has 300 000 cells already
and a one centimeter tumor would have
billion cells
so how are we going to then find a first
cell in when the presentation of the
disease
occurs when there are billions of cells
around
so which takes us back
another step then that instead of
waiting for a disease to declare itself
the future belongs to monitoring
wellness to find illness
and not just cancers it it has to apply
to everything in medicine
we have to pivot from being
a reactive science to being a proactive
science
and we need to go and find the first
cell
as soon as even before
its appearance because there may be
footprints
biomarkers signals of stress to an
organ even before a cancer arises
and with time we should be able to
develop the technology to monitor that
early stage that's how early i'm talking
about because
cancer doesn't just doesn't happen in my
opinion due to random mutations because
of aging
no it happens because there is some kind
of a stress that is
telling cells you either fight or flight
and in fact there's a third response in
addition to fight and flight which is
freeze sometimes they just freeze in
place and
wait it out till the stress goes away
but if if a cell is
frozen and waiting and keeps
synthesizing its dna and the stress
doesn't go away it's likely to make more
mistakes
and that's how cancer can arise that's
how the first cell can arrive
so that's a very radical hypothesis and
talk a little bit about it because
in your lab in your work you've been
finding
you've been looking for this these first
cells and
to do that you have this incredible
resource
which is your repository of tissues
you've been collecting
tissues long before anyone had the
wisdom to collect
tissues from patients with cancer i want
you to talk a little bit about
the the real value of that
tissue repository and how that value
of of having
samples from decades now informs or can
inform
a newly radical idea of treating and
thinking about cancer
it reminds me of a very beautiful share
by the way said because
no one can blame me for being
inconsistent i've been very consistent
right from the beginning of my career
as you pointed out
the tissue collection i have began for a
reason because i came to this
uh to the united states as a 24 year old
fresh graduate
an immigrant a muslim a woman arrived
here to cure cancer
because that's how 24 year olds feel
so i started by treating
and studying acute myeloid leukemia
within eight years it was very apparent
to me that in my lifetime
this malevolent malicious horrible
disease will not be cured and i wasn't
wrong because
as you know in 1977 i was treating acute
leukemia with two drugs popularly called
seven and three seven days of one three
days of another
in 2021 i'm still using the same
so i turned my attention in 1984
to listen to my patients who were giving
stories that dr azar blood counts were
low for years before we developed this
leukemia
sometimes for months so
that stage is called pre-leukemia and it
occurred to me that the disease
surely must be less complicated now you
you know said i divide people generally
i know
between people who knew me
when i was with harvey and people who
met me
after my whole life was over with harpy
and had you met harvey you would have
enjoyed this comment because when i
told him that i'm going to now study
milo dysplastic syndromes because they
are the pre-leukemia
he his response was no one can even
pronounce that disease
you're never going to get a ground so
now you know how much i listen to that
man because from that moment on that's
all i did
and i started saving samples because it
was very natural to me
to think oh being an immigrant i didn't
even think of making some kind of a
model in the lab i said if i'm going to
study my patients i should save their
samples
and this is how in 1984 the tissue
repository because
talk about for a second while you go on
how radical this idea was in 1984
but no one was like no one was taking
tissues
and spending their own money and putting
it into
a repository and now all of a sudden you
know people talk about oh tissue banks
et cetera et cetera
but in 1984 we'd never we hadn't heard
of this idea
yeah um yeah it was
i think it it was because i'm an
immigrant
and i trusted my instinct rather than
tradition or custom said
i honestly feel that had i gone to do a
to
school in this country i would have done
exactly what others were
doing because it seemed like a very
natural thing
we weren't we didn't know then how uh
some of the things could be misleading
so it was radical but i didn't feel it
was radical at the time i wish i could
give myself
credit that here i was an original
thinker but only in retrospect can you
assign that to me
and i also feel by the way that the real
real precious nature of this repository
will be appreciated only after i'm dead
and gone
because people are not even
people are still not willing to accept
and you know very well because you and i
do fundraisers together to support this
tissue repository which costs a
million dollars a year just to maintain
it and to add fresh samples to it
cost us a million dollars a year and yet
there is no funding available for it so
it's still a radical idea
still there we don't have the support my
idea about finding the first
cell is that we have patients with acute
leukemia but then i have all their
marrows going back
to the their samples going back to that
first stage when they were diagnosed
with pre-leukemia
so then you can ask me well what have i
been doing for the last three decades
why haven't i found the first cell it's
because it turned out
that one technology wasn't there when we
had the technology it turns out that
pre-leukemia itself is a cancer and it
kills patients so by the time we
diagnose pre-leukemia it's also already
too late
so then who are the people who are at
high risk of cancer that we can study
and that's a question that um is now
being answered by
uh by the oncology think tank which i
put together this last summer
as soon as we went on zoom i had the
idea that
you know building a consensus is very
important
why should i be the only one proclaiming
this from the rooftops that we need to
study the first cell and prevent
why aren't people who are studying
pancreatic cancer doing the same or
ovarian cancer doing the same we should
all be doing it
so i have you were the first one we
discussed it i got together 30 top
leaders from
md anderson and harvard and university
of chicago hopkins
major institutions in the country to
come together
make the think tank and we agreed that
we have to find
cancer at the first cell level so how
should we do it well who are the people
at risk of cancer
they are individuals who have survived
one cancer
and i don't want anyone in the audience
listening to this to start getting
anxious because we either have cancer
ourselves or know someone who has it
and or who has been cured of it and i
don't want you to think oh dr azar is
saying that you are now at high risk of
getting another cancer no
the idea yes there is a higher risk and
harvey my husband is the best example
because at 34 he got
one deadly cancer survives that
tormented
journey and then at 57 got another
completely unrelated cancer and dies
from it
so if we can find the first cell in
people who are at high risk we can
prevent that
from developing into an end stage
monstrosity so the idea is have a cancer
survivor center which means
just save 10 cc's 20 cc's of their blood
their saliva
and just periodically look for the first
cell
that's it and and and tell us a little
bit about
you've already started looking for this
for sales right
and um tell us about how that's going
and some some new leads and
and and how excited these people were
to sort of rethink the cancer paradigm
when you brought together the think tank
over the summer how excited you know
people who've been in the field for
40 years 50 years thinking gosh
you know if we only had a
a consortium to discuss these ideas
tell us about that excitement in the
field
well i think everyone recognized sid
that the
only decrease in cancer mortality
has come so far from either anti-smoking
campaigns
and lifestyle changes or early detection
of cancer
through the conventional means like
mammograms and psa
so i'm proposing that there a natural
evolution of these screening measures is
to use more sophisticated technology
now no one can argue with the fact that
we need to detect
earlier and earlier if possible and two
we need to develop the technology for it
and by the time the first cell
is formed and it starts shedding his
markers in the blood
it is they are so rare
let's say it's shedding its contents in
the form of
dna or rna or bits of protein right
they get diluted with the billions of
cells that are also shedding which are
normal into the blood
so even the kind of uh detection
technology that is being developed based
on biomarkers
measurements of mutated dna even that
can only detect 30 percent of stage 1
cancer forget about the first cell
so my idea has always been that you
can't develop technologies that can't
even detect the
stage one or two when you're talking
about the first cell
so basically then we should trap the
first cell
that's my idea how do you trap the first
cell
um our colleague patricia petrolini in
france
and so many other people now have
developed
various ways of catching
uh larger cells and cancer cells are
larger than
blood cells because blood cells are the
smallest so if we simply take
liquid biopsies which means 10 20 cc's
of blood pass it through a filter
blood cells will go through first cells
will be the large
larger cancer cells will be found and
then as you know i'm very excited
because our
this work has now shown that in fact the
first cells are not just large they're
giant giant cells and giant cells are
always
formed in response to some kind of
stress so now
our whole idea my what i have been
saying for years that there is some kind
of stress to which cells are responding
and now we see
that it's a natural response which goes
awry
um what is your sense of how this might
be applied to
you know the changing of the paradigm
towards more detection
and more uh and
earlier detection and of course
creations for countries like pakistan
and india
where if where you know treating cancer
at its end stage
has not just the toxicity of the drugs
but financial toxicities which are
unbearable um what is your sense
how how this paradigm shift would affect
uh developing countries
i think that's a question close to our
hearts and you and i talk about this all
the time
so one of my favorite books by the way
as you know
is moby dick and
what i learned from it is that
once the electric bulb comes along
we don't have to go wailing to get the
blubber of whales to make
oil for our lamps nobody thinks about
wailing anymore
once you have something dramatically
different
like once you have the word processor
who's worried about the typewriter
anymore
my insistence is
what thomas said if you want to
shift the paradigm
show the success of the new one and i
think we can show the success and said
i want to ask you something you see
the only way to find the first cell is
look for it in humans
all right which means we need human
tissue
now you know that
the most important study that was done
to do whole genome sequencing which
means study the entire genome of cancers
was a collaboration
between 750 cancer centers in
four continents and they published six
papers in nature
on february 5th of last year and they
studied
2 2000 i believe it was
sick 600 samples from 38 different
cancers they performed
whole genome sequencing so this project
in four continents was worth over a
billion dollars
six papers in nature i'll summarize for
you in two lines you know what was their
conclusion of course you know but for
the audience number one
cancer is very complicated that there
are many clones
many cancers within one cancer
yes we knew that all along sequencing
proved that and the second thing that it
proved
very interestingly the second conclusion
they had was
that the next phase of cancer research
has to be
clinical and on the bedside and you know
why they said that's it
because there was 0.00 clinical data
available on these samples
so that you couldn't relate this person
lived 10 years this patient died within
one year this person
who lived 10 years his sequence in the
dna revealed these genetic mutations
they just didn't have that information
to relate it to the
to what they were finding and my
question was why was a project of this
magnitude even undertaken without having
clinical information
why are we making the availability
of clinical samples and clinical
information so
difficult that our phd real scientists
have to resort to animal models because
we are not providing them with the
samples and why should it be the purview
of
even only on colleges to control these
samples
and anytime somebody tells me oh it is
so complicated privacy
shoes hipaa issues i see this is a
country that has thousands of nuclear
weapons
and you haven't been foreign
exactly i as an individual have been
able to save
sixty thousand samples not one breach
has ever occurred
but how many people want to do it i want
to start
a national drive for making humans
because there's no death of patience for
god's sake there's no dearth of cancer
specimens
why are we not to be not studying them
even in a study like that so
okay i'm gonna stop here because i get
too worked up about this whole thing i
think
i have endless sympathies with my basic
scientists and
um i think are
in a way we need to get off the high
horse we were arrogant to think we'll be
able to solve this problem without
having to study
actual human tissue but i think everyone
is realizing that now don't you agree
well agree yeah
so um you know as i said before your
book is
i want to come back um
it is it would be a
misapprehension to think of this book as
a science book because it
because like you it is also a
kaleidoscope
and it moves between stories of some of
the patients that you described
your own family your daughter's
best friend
and and many of your patients
and when you move from
the realm of science which is very much
in the book to the realm of describing
the lives of these patients
um there's a kind of there's a kind of
poetic change that happens
um the important thing
perhaps to recognize is that that poetic
change
is is is
dyadic in and it's it remains
um it remains part of the fabric of the
book
so it's not as if all of a sudden you
know you're reading the first cell and
say oh gosh now here's azura
moving from her science
uh piece to her patient piece
these are woven in and they become part
of the
part of the whole story and and the
story is a story
it becomes part of the story
tell us how you did that or how you how
you achieved that
and also tell us why it's important
and then i want you to bring bring you
back to
a book that i the first book of yours
that i read which was
uh about garlic um
and how that book um
influences and and and turns this book
into
this kind of poetic meteor um
so it's a complicated question take it
as you will but but uh
but tell us about how this book sort of
put together
and how that that book on golem really
affects this book
which no one might even not even you
know you might not even know
people are reading this book around
around the world they don't know you as
someone who's translated
um you know thousands of poems um
they know you as an oncologist they know
you as a an oncological thinker so
tell us how these things are are part of
the same
kaleidoscope
i'll answer this question if you promise
that when i ask you next
tell us about how music affects you so
profoundly
you're going to do it okay okay
so look um experiences need an
expression
they don't need statistics in fact they
need
poetry why because poetry
physics mathematics basically
the literature they're all doing the
same thing
they're putting our experiences our
observations either into
symbols or into couplets
or into a double strand of dna two lines
of a share equal
to equals two strands of the dna a
macrocosm within a microcosm
also because reading poetry
you realize that somebody else is saying
in a better way what you wanted to say
what was in your heart they
that's the beauty of poetry that it
seems to to be able to
open doors between people between
cultures
between all of humanity i mean i can't
begin to tell you
how many times did i use poetry to relax
my patients
and how they respond so beautifully to
it
emily dickinson i had no time to hate
because the grave would hinder me
and life was not so ample i could finish
enmity
how beautiful i had no time to hate
because the grave would hinder me and
life was not so ample
i could finish enmity nor had i time to
love
but since some industry must be
this little toil of love i thought was
large enough for me
it's an expression of the toils of love
really
and i feel that there is a
couplet for every bit of anxiety i have
every bit of insecurity i feel
and just to to finish my expression of
poetry before i
ask you which you promised to do
i want to to pay
my respects to you and to vaasif rizvi
the president of habib university and to
thank him for inviting me
uh and sid for this beautiful program so
sid you may not
know it but but in sindhi sindh of
course
karachi is in sin that's where i grew up
and sin is in every fiber of my body
what can i say
and one of the most gorgeous beautiful
words in sindhi
by the way i i understand about eighty
percent of sandy
no way i'm gonna test you right after we
hang up
so you know then because this word i'm
going to use
is very much like the word in urdu kafir
because kafir can mean you know the
pagan but it also means the beloved
so and it is a word that is used with
the
greatest of affection kafir
the same way in sindhi we have a word
sign
and i will end by reading this brief
poem i'm sorry i apologize
to those people who can't understand
would do but this is just a one minute
tribute to both
uh maybe maybe you should translate
maybe you should translate afterwards
uh maybe after we hang up people want to
hear the translation
you know how much i hate doing that said
i know you're abusing me and you're
pulling my leg
so this uh this poem is written by a
lovely
a a physician who's now a very famous
hepatologist in sacramento california
but 30 years ago he worked in my lab
and he was a young man who dr yasin
atef muhammad yaseen aather is his
[Music]
foreign
when you and i are talking as you know
and sid
everything else becomes silent
and said i hope
i want to tell people something about
sid the other day
we were trying to get hold of
some big wig in oncology
and sid wrote to them they didn't
respond i
texted said what's happening
so sid as he mentioned at the
pre-zoom meeting that he has spent the
last year really
this lock down social isolation to
familiarize himself with the great of
stars
and at the moment he is obsessed with
dark they will be
so we exchange a lot of poetry of dark
and we exchanged a number of
wonderful anecdotes about him because
there was no more colorful
poet than him but i would like to ask
sid before we end and go on to question
answers
because the most gorgeous times i have
really is when sid and i are pulling all
nighters
in methyls at either at my home or sid's
home
uh and he is rendering
the most moving profound poetry
in his gorgeous voice people don't may
not know this
but of course they know that sid is a
man of 30 dimensions
he's a great chef he's a great artist
he's a great teacher he's a great
scientist he's good at everything
and one of the things but the thing he
was being graced to do
was to sing he was supposed to be a
vocalist
and he rebelled and became a scientist
so his mother actually
thanks me for bringing back that part of
his
uh personality after not singing for 20
years he returned
so i'm gonna ask him to you know
the pakistani pakistanis love
poetry like and indians of course the
people of subcontinent
love poetry like no other people on
earth
and no one will appreciate this more
than what you are going to do
so i only did this because azra said
whenever azura asked me to do something
i usually do it um
but uh i i generally never
perform in in conversation
so you have to excuse me about that but
uh you know why not do something new and
try something new um i thought i would
sing two three lines
and then maybe i i want to talk about
the poem because i'm very kind of moved
by
by the poem and so sometimes i might go
into its temporary
um you know the great photographer the
anita singh
said that you know what's missing in
music to some extent um
and missing in portraiture something's
poetry readings music
conditionings is the informality
um informality creates a kind of
space which allows
a kind of which allows a discussion
where you feel free from
being judged and this is how
azura created her tissue repository this
is how she created you know wrote a book
on galib
this is how she has you know created a
practice and this is what ultimately
leads to the idea of the first cell the
t ott the the thought leaders committee
etc etc
and that is to preserve a kind of
informality
um and as soon as you make things formal
as soon as you make things as soon as
you tighten them there's a grant due
there's this that that's actually done
that spirit
that human beings have of
the the capacity to exchange ideas for
themselves
for no other reason and with no shame
shameless ideas goes away and that's a
terrible tragedy
and that's why when you ask people you
know what was the best time in your life
they say they call it
they say college and that's because
that was the time when they could say
the most foolish things are the most
wise things
and they were intermingled together um
so anyway so that's just a prelude um of
of i'm going to saying two three lines
but i want to talk a little
bit about uh this incredible piece of
poetry
um
[Music]
i turned on some
it's too loud somebody turn it down
[Music]
and this virtue is familiar to every one
of you but i've been looking at it and
over and over again and thinking about
[Music]
it
[Laughter]
[Music]
we
i
[Music]
foreign
[Laughter]
[Music]
foreign
i'll read one more phrase yes yes by all
means
[Music]
bismillah
hey
[Music]
the sun
my
[Music]
we are
that's my contribution from today um
but i want to talk about one thing
before we end up
because i spent you know these months
in lockdown etc
um thinking about this lovely word
or this lovely phrase
which is simple long time has passed
and now comes the beautiful word
you can take that phrase and write a
full book on it ezra
what does it mean to make your lover
a guest a guest of what
who's the lover is it god is it
science is it the first cell
long time has passed since i've
made my lover a guest a guest of what a
guest of my thoughts
a guest of my impulses a guest of my
the deepest things that i feel
i lit i have spent probably i would say
months
thinking about how to even convey that
line to translate that line to anyone
and to bring the conversation full
circle
right
cancer is an unwelcome guest
it's an unwelcome guest in anyone
but the radical idea that is in the
first
cell is to say
it's a part of ourselves the cancer
cells are part of
a distorted version of a human cell
and rather than wait for it to invade
and take over our bodies what if we turn
the paradigm around like asgas
says and think of it as
a guest and i will quote the last
lines from marilyn
from the great poet
[Music]
who says
my father um
she's talking about her father my father
was honest
when he welcomed guests and said
treat my house as your in
in as an inn and the last line is
inns are not residences
so um with those words i'd like to
finish
uh this uh incredible session
and uh was if you know there's some
questions here but
maybe you can you can take us away and
and close us down and if there are any
questions
uh please uh go ahead ezra
right well it seems uh
a little gustafi to uh to continue it
with some
you know to follow what we just heard
from uh
you know the rendition of psy and then
this sublime muzzle which uh
is perhaps uh
one of his most famous kalams right
but we have to respect our audience and
and and there are uh
a couple of questions here azerava um
so there is there's one from uh judith
ravitz um how can you eliminate
the first giant cell after it is
detected
what's the elimination of it let's say
we follow
the first cell instead of the last
said are you still there or are you
rushing to catch your train
because i'm here i'm still here sid i
think you should answer this question
because
uh judith and the clark we really missed
you just now
uh because the flak ustad hussain
is the maestro who is a sitar
uh great right now and they have moved
to geneva last year and we missed them
in new york
because he was always
the star performer with sid
judith that's a beautiful question
you're asking what do we do if we find
the first cell i'd rather sid answer it
because he is developing that technology
sid talk about your cellular technology
and by the way
sid said that he has spent this lockdown
reading urdu along with writing six
articles for the new yorker opening four
companies
and uh perform and and and
also uh writing another book
but what else did well you know
um one of the things that um
i think covid uh
created a kind of manic carpe diem
in my brain
which only lockdowns can so one of the
things that we've been doing
is we've been training normal cells
t cells immune cells myeloid cells i've
actually been able to train all of them
to find such giant cells
um what's amazing about these cells is
that unlike drugs
they are living so we call them living
drugs
um we train them
and they behave a little bit like you
know the sniffing dogs at the airport
the normal drugs that we use in the body
have a problem like aspirin or other
drugs right so they act on this
and what they're supposed to act on but
they have no
capacity for surveillance you don't
think of a drug as a mechanism of
surveillance
um living drugs because they are alive
have a capacity for surveillance they
they keep
looking and they look again and they
keep living and looking and looking
again
and we have trained uh t cells
myeloid cells and other parts of the
immune system
to keep looking and looking again for
these cells for these first cells
and on so it's really it's a yin yang
project on one hand
azra's group is defining these giant
cells and
figuring out what is special about them
and our group is figuring out
if you can tell me what's special about
them
i can train your immune system and pack
it
so that you can create a surveillance
system
which is not a not a drug but a living
drug that will exist in your body for a
long time
and go from your you know from luggage
to luggage just like the
dog sniffers at the airport and
essentially detect the cell
and that's what we're doing another
quick question
from chris taylor who is over a vice
president for academic affairs
what if the first cell in quotes isn't a
cell
but an organelle
hi chris that's a good question well we
should be able to catch it whatever it
is an
organelle means that within a cell there
is something else besides the dna
uh an rna and protein that we've been
looking at what if it's
uh the golgi apparatus or is it the
mitochondria that has gone awry well
that's what we're trying to do
chris is to catch the first cell and
these can be caught on filters but also
our colleague has now developed the
technology that they can be
collected in a suspension even though
they are 1 in
50 billion cells that are circulating 1
in 50 billion
just because of size we can enrich their
population by catching them
in tubes and then we are now studying
the giant cell by multi-omics technology
one single cell by proteomics genomics
transcriptomics metabolomics everything
you can
to study to find the unique markers and
if it's not the whole giant
cell it's something inside the giant
cell that's what we are trying to find
exactly and then we turn it over to sid
and say okay
this is what's unique about this cell
compared to the other cells in the body
now you train your immune cells to come
and target specifically
and this will individualize cancer
treatment like no other precision
medicine has done
oh so i think um
we'll stop the question answer in
respect for uh sid's risk request
um in the beginning that he has a
pressing commitment
before he leaves i just want to quote
garlic for him i mean this was the first
time i i saw
him and met him uh i'll meet via
virtual technology
but
as soon as you find the right
combination it separates
so perfection means also spell
separation
what a beautiful shape go ahead sorry to
inter
interrupt but i am aficionado an
interpreter
this digital or numbered lock has this
this agonizing irony that it only stays
together
when you don't know the right
combination
it separates how beautiful
well with those lines thank you very
much and um
i'm delighted to be part of this
august forum and i hope um we meet again
in person
in the in another world which is not so
darkened by medicine
thank you i i would like to just uh
formally conclude with with um with
these words
somewhere in the 14th century uh a
syrian moloch
um ibrahim also known as ibm
is timekeeper in a mosque
centuries before copernicus or galileo
put to rest a 1 000 year old utterly
wrong
geocentric model of ptolemaic
astronomy this model was
quasi sacred for greeks and romans but
ibn shatter was not too concerned about
preserving this false dogma
azaraapa has created a comparable
revolution
in the approach towards treating cancer
it's obviously jarring to a deeply
entrenched
cut burn poison enterprise of cancer
therapeutics
who had to wait two centuries before the
world began to come around to conceding
to his findings we don't have to wait
that long
one obvious service is for us to support
the widespread
reading of this seminal book the first
cell
and the human cost of pursuing cancer to
the law to the last
the publishers basic books in the u.s
and light stone here in karachi in
pakistan have made it extremely easy
for all of us to buy multiple copies for
a list of people whom we want this book
to be mailed to and it gets delivered
we have done that from the platform of
habib university
and i urge all the participants and
whoever is going to watch this program
to consider something along these lines
azarappa
thank you thank you for uh
for liberating us from circling the last
cell
and start thinking about a different
kind of universe
vis-a-vis cancer
adam thank you